Add SSO technical documentation page (#68)
strapi/documentation: developer-docs/latest/concepts/sso.md

# Single Sign On

Single-Sign-On on Strapi allows you to configure additional sign-in and sign-up methods for your administration panel.

## Prerequisites

- A Strapi application running on version 3.5.0 or higher is required.

> - To configure SSO on your application, you will need an **EE license**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To configure SSO on your application, you will need an EE license.
```

> - If needed, **make sure Strapi is part of the applications you can access with you provider**.
> 
>   For example, with Microsoft (Azure) Active Directory, you must first ask someone with the right permissions to add Strapi to the list of allowed applications.
> 
>   Please refer to your provider(s) documentation to learn more about that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Make sure Strapi is part of the applications you can access with you provider. For example, with Microsoft (Azure) Active Directory, you must first ask someone with the right permissions to add Strapi to the list of allowed applications. Please refer to your provider(s) documentation to learn more about that.
```

`admin.auth.providers` is an array of [provider configuration](#provider-configuration).

```javascript
module.exports = ({ env }) => ({
  // ...
  admin: {
    // ...
    auth: {
      providers: [], // The providers' configuration lives there
    },
  },
});
```

### Provider Configuration

A provider's configuration is a simple Javascript object built with the following properties:

| Name             | Required | Type     | Description                                                                    |
|----------------- |----------|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `uid`            | true     | string   | The UID of the strategy. It must match the strategy's name                     |
| `displayName`    | true     | string   | The name that will be used on the login page to reference the provider        |
| `icon`           | false    | string   | An image URL. If specified, it will replace the displayName on the login page  |
| `createStrategy` | true     | function | A factory that will build and return a new passport strategy for your provider. Takes the strapi instance as parameter |

> ::: tip
> The `uid` property is the unique identifier of each strategy and is generally found in the strategy's package.
> 
> If you are not sure of what it refers to, please contact the maintainer of the strategy.
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: tip
The `uid` property is the unique identifier of each strategy and is generally found in the strategy's package. If you are not sure of what it refers to, please contact the maintainer of the strategy.
:::
```

#### The `createStrategy` Factory

A passport strategy is usually built by instantiating it using two parameters:

##### Configuration Object

> The configuration object depends on the strategy needs, but often ask for a callback url to be redirected to once the connection has been made on the provider side.

Reviewer: Also, could you homogenise by replacing all "url" by "URL"?

You can generate a specific callback url for your provider using the `getProviderCallbackUrl` method.

::: tip

> `strapi.admin.services.passport.getProviderCallbackUrl` is a Strapi util you can use to get a callback URL for a specific provider. It takes a provider name as a parameter and returns a URL as a string.

Reviewer: "util"? I'm not sure this is the best wording choice

:::

If needed, this is also where you will put your client ID and secret key for your OAuth2 application.

##### Verify Function

The verify function is used here as a middleware allowing the user to transform and make extra processing on the data returned from the provider API.

This function always takes a `done` method as last parameter which is used to transfer needed data to the Strapi layer of SSO.

Its signature is the following: `void done(error: any, data: object);` and it follows the following rules:

- If `error` is not set to `null`, then the data sent is ignored, and the controller will throw an error.
- If the SSO's auto-registration feature is disabled, then the `data` object only need to be composed of an `email` property.
- If the SSO's auto-registration feature is enabled, then you will need to define (in addition to the `email`) either a `username` property or both `firstname` and `lastname` within the `data` oject.

### Adding a provider

Adding a new provider means adding a new way for your administrators to log-in.

> To achieve a great flexibility and a large choice of provider, we use [Passport.js](http://www.passportjs.org/) under the hood. It means that any valid passport strategy that doesn't need additional custom data should also work with Strapi. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve a great flexibility and a large choice of provider, Strapi uses [Passport.js](http://www.passportjs.org/). Any valid passport strategy that doesn't need additional custom data should therefore work with Strapi. 
```

::: warning
Strategies such as [ldapauth](https://github.com/vesse/passport-ldapauth) don't work out of the box since they require extra data to be sent from the admin panel.
If you want to add an LDAP provider to your application, you will need to write a [custom strategy](http://www.passportjs.org/packages/passport-custom/).
You can also use services such as Okta and Auth0 as bridge services.
:::

### Configuring the provider

> Configuring a new provider is straight-forward:

Reviewer: As we should avoid using the word "simple", we should avoid using similar words such as "straight-forward".
Instead, you could introduce the procedure by something like "To configure a new provider[, follow the procedure below]:".

> 1. First, make sure to import your strategy in your server configuration file. (from an installed package or a local file)

Reviewer: Since you use a procedure (numbered list), you shouldn't start steps with "First", "next", or "finally". You should go straight to the point, indicating for each step what is the action that the user should do.

For example:
"1. Make sure your strategy has been imported in your server configuration file, either from an installed package or a local file."

Reviewer: Again, avoid using parenthesis

```bash
yarn add passport-discord
```

`/config/server.js`

```jsx
"use strict";

const DiscordStrategy = require("passport-discord");

module.exports = ({ env }) => ({
  // ...
  admin: {
    // ...
    auth: {
      // ...
      providers: [
        {
          uid: 'discord',
          displayName: 'Discord',
          icon: 'https://cdn0.iconfinder.com/data/icons/free-social-media-set/24/discord-512.png',
          createStrategy: strapi =>
            new DiscordStrategy(
              {
                clientID: env('DISCORD_CLIENT_ID'),
                clientSecret: env('DISCORD_SECRET'),
                callbackURL: strapi.admin.services.passport.getProviderCallbackUrl(
                  'discord'
                ),
                scope: ['identify', 'email'],
              },
              (accessToken, refreshToken, profile, done) => {
                done(null, {
                  email: profile.email,
                  username: `${profile.username}#${profile.discriminator}`,
                });
              }
            ),
        },
      ],
    },
  },
});
```
:::
::::

## Advanced Customization

### Admin Panel URL

> If your administration panel lives on a different host/port than your Strapi server, you will need to specify the values in the admin config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your administration panel lives on a different host/port than your Strapi server, you will need to specify the values in the admin configuration.
```

Avoid using abbreviations in a documentation

> To do so, heads to your `/config/admin.js` configuration file (create it if it doesn't exist) and tweaks the host and port fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, head to your `/config/admin.js` configuration file and tweak the host and port fields.
```

Here, to avoid having "create it if it doesn't exist" in parenthesis, you could turn this piece of information into a note.

> # Single Sign On

Reviewer 2: @meganelacheny following our discussion, probably have to add a more visual item to inform of the enterprise edition gold.

And we can't just say `ee` cause it's only in the gold.

I used a bronze one and lost time by not understanding why the feature was not there 😅

Author: We were already pointing the need for a gold license there: https://github.com/strapi/documentation/pull/68/files#diff-d3e17514d1e55a57320d0ea2e7e4dad823292a495519a40749c11755742be568R8
But to avoid any confusion I've added a badge there: https://github.com/strapi/documentation/pull/68/files#diff-d3e17514d1e55a57320d0ea2e7e4dad823292a495519a40749c11755742be568R1

| Name             | Required | Type     | Description                                                                    |
|----------------- |----------|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `uid`            | true     | string   | The UID of the strategy. It must match the strategy's name                     |
| `displayName`    | true     | string   | The name that will be used on the login page to reference the provider        |
| `icon`           | false    | string   | An image URL. If specified, it will replace the displayName on the login page  |
| `createStrategy` | true     | function | A factory that will build and return a new passport strategy for your provider. Takes the strapi instance as parameter |

::: tip
The `uid` property is the unique identifier of each strategy and is generally found in the strategy's package. If you are not sure of what it refers to, please contact the maintainer of the strategy.
:::

#### The `createStrategy` Factory

A passport strategy is usually built by instantiating it using 2 parameters: the configuration object, and the verify function.

> ##### Configuration Object

Reviewer 2: This section is not clear to me. I would rephrase it.

Saying that a `callback URL` is needed in the configuration of every provider.
This information is set on the provider side when you create an auth application.
To not duplicate the information (in Strapi config and in the SSO provider auth app) we created this service function `getStrategyCallbackURL` to get the `callback URL` set in the SSO provider auth app.

The first time I tried, it was not clear the `callback URL` I have to set when I created the SSO provider auth app (in my case GitHub)
I think it's worth it to indicate the `callback URL` format to set in the SSO provider auth app.

Author: In fact, a callback URL is not needed for *every* provider (really often though).
I'll add a note about the structure of the URL and its usage though.

::: warning
Strategies such as [ldapauth](https://github.com/vesse/passport-ldapauth) don't work out of the box since they require extra data to be sent from the admin panel.
If you want to add an LDAP provider to your application, you will need to write a [custom strategy](http://www.passportjs.org/packages/passport-custom/).
You can also use services such as Okta and Auth0 as bridge services.
:::

### Configuring the provider

To configure a provider, follow the procedure below:

1. Make sure to import your strategy in your server configuration file, either from an installed package or a local file.
2. You'll need to add a new item to the `admin.auth.providers` array in your server configuration that will match the [format given above](#provider-configuration)
3. Restart your application, the provider should appear on your admin login page.

## Examples

:::: tabs

::: tab Google

Using: [passport-google-oauth2](https://github.com/mstade/passport-google-oauth2)

```bash

> yarn add passport-google-oauth2

Reviewer 3: We should probably clarify yarn vs npm at some point to harmonize our documentation. Sometimes we use npm, sometimes yarn, sometimes both. :thinking:

Author: You're right, I'll put both methods here

```bash
yarn add passport-discord
```

`/config/server.js`

```jsx
"use strict";

const DiscordStrategy = require("passport-discord");

module.exports = ({ env }) => ({
  // ...
  admin: {
    // ...
    auth: {
      // ...
      providers: [
        {
          uid: 'discord',
          displayName: 'Discord',
          icon: 'https://cdn0.iconfinder.com/data/icons/free-social-media-set/24/discord-512.png',
          createStrategy: strapi =>
            new DiscordStrategy(
              {
                clientID: env('DISCORD_CLIENT_ID'),
                clientSecret: env('DISCORD_SECRET'),
                callbackURL: strapi.admin.services.passport.getStrategyCallbackURL(
                  'discord'
                ),
                scope: ['identify', 'email'],
              },
              (accessToken, refreshToken, profile, done) => {
                done(null, {
                  email: profile.email,
                  username: `${profile.username}#${profile.discriminator}`,
                });
              }
            ),
        },
      ],
    },
  },
});
```
:::
::::

## Advanced Customization

### Admin Panel URL

> If your administration panel lives on a different host/port than your Strapi server, you will need to modify the admin URL.

Reviewer 3: Not always the case, this is anytime it's sitting behind a proxy, which will be almost always if you need SSL.

This will need to be reworded.

Author: Do you have a suggestion?

Author: As we're about to release this feature, do you have any idea/tip about how to reword this part @derrickmehaffy?

Reviewer 3: :thinking: it really depends on the deployment, I would say it would only apply if you are using sub-folder based proxying. If you are just using a sub-domain then you don't need to set the admin url.

See the examples for Nginx: https://strapi.io/documentation/developer-docs/latest/deployment/nginx-proxy.html#strapi-server

Reviewer 3: The only example that needs this var set is on the sub-folder split config

To do so, head to your `/config/server.js` configuration file and tweak the `admin.url` field.

For example, if your admin application has been started on `localhost:4000`, your configuration will look like the following:

```javascript
{
  ...
  admin: {

>     url: 'http://localhost:4000/admin',

Reviewer 3: Technically the user sets the running port to 4000, this isn't needed as it will automatically default to this. We should avoid localhost examples and instead provide simulation real world examples. IE `https://api.example.com` or something like that.

I'll try my hand with a commit to modify some of the wording.

    ...
  }
}
```

### Custom Logic

In some scenarios, you will want to write additional logic for your connection workflow such as:
- Restricting connection and registration for a specific domain
- Triggering actions on connection attempt
- Analytics

The easiest way to do so is to plug into the verify function of your strategy and write some code.

For example, if you want to allow only people with an official strapi.io email address, you can instantiate your strategy like this:

```javascript

> const strategyInstance = new Strategy(

Reviewer 3: Need location of where this would be, if it's the server.js we should clarify that, at the moment it's too abstract. Does this go in `./config/functions`?

Author: The point here was not to showcase a file but a way to structure and build your strategies. (which you then use in your server.js config file)

  configuration,
  (email, done) => {
    if (!email.endsWith('@strapi.io')) {
      done(new Error('Forbidden email address'));
      return;
    }
    
    done(null, { email });
  },
);
```

### Authentication Events

The SSO feature adds a new [authentication event](configurations.html#available-options): `onSSOAutoRegistration`.

This event is triggered whenever a user is created using the auto-register feature added by SSO.
It contains the created user (`event.user`), and the provider used to make the registration (`event.provider`).

Example:

```javascript

> module.exports = () => ({

Reviewer 3: While we do understand this is part of the server.js, we should make that clear with a file path and the typical snippet comments `// ...` to make it very clear where it's to be used.

The best method for clarifying documentation is to consider someone with absolutely no previous knowledge of the system should be able to reasonably determine  the location and requirements beforehand and typically at a first glance.

Author: You're right, I've modified the code examples to reflect your suggestion.
